Hello, uh, deputy Chief Executive, uh, for autho,
the Cancer Control Agency,
and Sasha Webb, uh, the Director of Equity
and AU Centered Care, um, at the Cancer Control Agency.
Um, and we have a few other colleagues on the back
there, Dawn, uh, Tim.
And, um, so I'll begin, uh,
by providing about a 10, uh, 15 minute overview.
And, uh, then happy to, to get into the questions.
So, first of all, thank you for, uh,
giving us the opportunity to address you this morning.
Uh, so my name is Rami Rahal.
Uh, I'm the Chief Executive of TE tca, the Cancer Control,
um, agency for New Zealand.
I've been in this role since July of 2023.
Uh, arriving here from Canada,
where I held executive leadership roles at the National
Cancer Control Agency in Canada.
So very similar, uh, agency at the national level, uh,
in the Canadian system.
I've been involved in the New Zealand Cancer system actually
since 2019, uh,
when I participated in the cancer at a
Crossroads conference.
That was in February of that year, which set the stage
for the development of the cancer action plan
for the 2019 29 period,
and the subsequent establishment
of the Cancer Control Agency.
Um, and I think it's,
it's been a while since the agency has appeared before you.
And so I wanted to begin by briefly outlining
why New Zealand has a dedicated cancer control agency
and the role that we play in the health system.
Every day in New Zealand, 80 people are
diagnosed with cancer.
It's every day, and this year,
10,000 people will die of the disease.
Cancer is the leading cause of death in New Zealand.
It's therefore only right that our health system responds
to this by having an agency whose sole focus is
to improve outcomes for all who face a cancer diagnosis
and to prevent as many cancers as possible.
For many years before the agency was established,
there were growing concerns about cancer outcomes
and equity in New Zealand.
Data showed that while New Zealand once performed well
internationally, our outcomes,
particularly the survival which measures the percent of, uh,
patients diagnosed with cancer or alive
after five years, had started to fall
behind comparable countries.
Furthermore, cancer mortality rates continue
to be much higher for Maori
and Pacific peoples than for paia.
This gap in outcomes was felt by those using the system,
missed diagnoses, delays in treatment,
and regional variations in care,
all were eroding trust and causing harm.
So at that point, patient advocates, clinicians,
and cancer charities increasingly pressed the government
to act, highlighting delays in treatment
and variations in survival rates.
One of the most powerful voices there was Blair Vining.
A Southland FA father diagnosed
with late stage bowel cancer.
Blair, alongside his wife Melissa,
courageously elevated the challenges faced
by patients across the system.
While Blair sadly passed away,
he left an extraordinary legacy.
In August of 2019, the government announced the creation
of the Cancer Control Agency.
Its mandate is to provide national leadership oversight
and accountability for cancer control.
Ensuring care is better planned, more consistent,
and more equitable across the country.
The agency was tasked
with implementing the New Zealand Cancer Action Plan,
which was a 10 year plan between 2019 and 29.
The action plan is a comprehensive framework designed
to improve prevention, early detection, treatment,
survivorship and pa, palliative
and end of life care with equity
and partnership with all players in the system.
At its core, the agency has now been
operating for five years.
We are a departmental agency within the Ministry of Health,
which means we operate independently
while also benefiting from shared back office functions.
So all of our finance, hr, payroll, IT office space,
et cetera, is provided by the Ministry of Health.
And this structure allows us
to be fiscally responsible while maintaining a
specific focus on cancer.
As we all know, our partners in the health system,
health New Zealand, the Ministry of Health, along
with others, must respond to the vast array
of operational priorities each day.
The focus is rightly on the urgent
and pressing needs of the health system,
and that work is critical.
But the great benefit of having a standalone cancer control
agency is that we are not bound to the crises of the day.
Instead, our role includes preparing for the challenges
and opportunities of tomorrow.
And that is particularly important for cancer control,
a domain that is undergoing increasingly rapid advances in
screening, diagnostic treatments
and research, all of which need
to be anticipated and responded to.
Moreover, the agency provides a critical mass
of expertise supported by a large advisory network
of clinicians, researchers, consumers,
and others that allows us to dedicate the time necessary
to develop comprehensive well thought out solutions
to the challenges being faced in cancer.
As the Minister of Health's chief Advisor on Cancer,
we bring a sharp focus lens to issues as they emerge,
while also scanning the horizon to implement changes
that will deliver results in the year ahead.
One example of this is the work we completed recently
developing new models of care
and optimal pathways that transform
how cancer care is organized, resourced,
and delivered to support system sustainability
and effective outcomes for patients.
So when the government invested $604 million into Pharm Act
medicine's budget resulting in 33 new cancer medicines
entering the system, the agency's work on models of care
for systemic anti-cancer therapy,
which is chemotherapy immunotherapy.
Those drugs that were funded as part of the Phar Act uplift
that, um, the the, the work was vital
for helping the system deliver these medicines in innovative
ways, both efficiently and closer to home.
There are course many more examples of the agency's impact.
We have helped ensure that PET CT scans that are vital
for diagnosing cancer are available
to all patients within the public health system,
which was not the case before.
We are guiding the expansion of Linux
that are radiation delivery machines, um, the infrastructure
of those Linux, ensuring that it is evidence driven
that the Linux are implemented in the right locations
and delivered in the right way.
We are leading the development of data systems
that allow these data systems allow clinicians
to have real time access
to critical information about their patients.
We are helping the system prepare for the delivery
of state-of-the-art cellular therapies
that will be game changers for patients with blood cancers.
We are working closely with partners in Australia, Canada,
the uk, and Europe, to benchmark variations in cancer
outcomes and learn from each other on
what specific capabilities improve survival
and can be adopted in all of our countries.
And these are just a few examples
of efforts which aimed at improving
outcomes for New Zealanders.
We are also an agency that is in internationally connected
and respected, and this enables us
to draw on expertise from across the globe,
providing insights that help us tackle challenges as
that we face here in New Zealand.
By learning from others and sharing our own experience,
we are better able to solve problems
and continue to improve outcomes
for people affected by cancer.
I speak from experience being from Canada.
New Zealand's Cancer Control Agency is known
for punching above its weight.
Our approach is widely regarded
as innovative and evidence driven.
We are proud of this reputation
and it motivates us to continue to deliver the very best
for the people we serve.
I will now give you a summary of the current state
of cancer in New Zealand based on the LA latest
data available to us.
So let's start with some good news.
First, in New Zealand, the chance
of dying from cancer has been declining for decades.
The mortality rate, which which is the number
of cancer deaths per a hundred thousand people adjusted for,
uh, for age, has dropped from 145 per a hundred thousand in
2001 to 105 in 2022,
that's almost a 30% decrease.
And most of that is coming from improvements in
how we screen for and treat cancer.
The chance of surviving cancer
after five years has improved from 58% in
1998 to 68% in 2021.
That translates roughly
to 3000 more people alive every year in 2025.
Faster cancer treatment wait times have been nudging up
towards the 90% target
and the last 18 months, hundreds
of millions have been invested
to make many more cancer medicines publicly available
to thousands of cancer patients.
Other large investments have been made in expanding
radiation treatment capacity through new centers in FANG
and Taranaki opening this year
and next with others to follow elsewhere across the MO too.
Those are wins we should celebrate,
but there is much work left to do.
That improvement in survival
that I talked about is not happening as quickly
as NPR countries.
We are falling behind our international comparators
incidence rates.
So the, the risk of getting cancer has been dropping
for decades due to steady reductions in smoking rates,
but have begun to bounce up recently, likely driven
by increases in other risk factors like unhealthy nutrition,
physical inactivity, and excess body weight.
As shown in our recent through to diagnosis report,
too many QE are getting their diagnosis
of cancer in the emergency department
or through an acute hospital admission
when their symptoms are advanced
rather than early in primary care
with their GP when their cancer is
more likely to be curable.
Recruiting and retaining cancer clinicians remains a
challenge due to internationally competitive market
with workforce shortages in a number of number
of areas like stem cell transplant, radiology,
radiation oncology, gynecological surgery, endoscopy,
and others contributing to reduced access
and increased wait times for many patients.
And fa while investments in expanded
navigation services
for Maori are making a positive difference, gaps persist,
notable among them are significant deficits in the National
Travel Assistance Program,
which is still falling short of meeting needs.
Although reforms are in progress, there continue
to be significant gaps in the quality of our data systems
and our ability to conduct clinical
research at the levels needed.
The state of our physical infrastructure is mixed,
and a number of hospitals
and cancer centers are in serious need of investment.
And our need to fund increasingly expensive diagnostics
and therapeutics that are coming down the pipe will continue
to put major pressure on our fiscal resources.
Having highlighted the wins
and remaining challenges, it's important to recognize some
of the exciting opportunities on the horizon.
A coordinated strategy for the elimination
of cervical cancer is promising to make a cancer
that continues to kill more women in low
and middle income countries than any other,
a rare disease in New Zealand.
We actually have a chance to eradicate the cancer in this
country, and we are transforming the way we deliver care
shifting from large tertiary centers
to community-based delivery closer to home.
And as part of that, expanding the role
of specially trained nurses, radiation technologists,
pharmacists, and others to take on roles
that were previously done by cancer doctors.
These efforts will help us better respond
to the rapidly rising demand
and to improve access to needed care.
We at Te te Kahu have embarked on an exciting program
of work this year to move forward on all
of these opportunities and more
we have intentionally focused on parts of the cancer journey
that have not received enough attention to date.
These include early detection
and primary care support for survivors of cancer
after the treatment is over
and they continue to face many challenges
and symptoms, early integration of palliative care
for patients with advanced disease,
so they don't suffer needlessly.
We've also launched a new approach
for system performance reports
and dashboards that balance access
to useful indicator data on quality
and spotlight reports highlighting critical performance
issues that the system needs to address.
Happy to provide more details on any aspect of our program
of work that would be of interest to you.
Thank you. And I'll hand it back to you now for questions.
Well, thank you very much for that overview,
comprehensive overview.
I open it up to members. Are there questions?
Yes. Excellent.
And appreciate, um, the introduction
that, that you've given.
Um, and I suppose my first question is really kind of,
really kind of exploring how you actually operate, how,
how you interact with the other players in the field,
whether it be Health New Zealand,
the public health agency mm-hmm.
The Ministry of Health. Um,
and just noting in your, uh,
your last annual review on page 29, um,
you talk about the cervical screening elimination strategy.
The agent is supporting the public health agency
and health in New Zealand on progressing the,
the implementation of the cervical cancer
elimination strategy.
Can you actually, kind of using that as an example, how
are you supporting these, these different agencies?
Um, what's, what's your remit?
What's the remit in actually the nitty gritty details of
what, what's actually happening
that's outlined in the paragraph?
Thank you for that question. That's actually a good
question and a good example to demonstrate, um, how we work.
So, eliminating cervical cancer has three strategies.
So there's three things we need to do to get to that target.
One is we need better prevention through HPV vaccination.
That is the remit of the public health agency
to develop policies around that
and ensure that that's being done.
We need to have, uh, effective screening
through HPV primary testing, which is the, the,
the new screening modality for cervical cancer.
And that is a responsibility
of the National Public Health Service.
And we need to have good access to diagnosis
and treatment, mainly oscopy, which is the test you do
after a positive screening result,
and then access the treatment,
which is the responsibility of Health New Zealand.
Now, these are three distinct strategies that all need
to be coordinated and, and organized
and happening together in a, in a, in a sort of a, a sort
of a smooth way for us to get to that target,
which then brings us to the Cancer Control Agency.
So we are, that, that,
and our name is, is, is, is the Yahoo, which is the,
the sort of the binding thread of the cloak,
which is we bring the partners together
that may be working on different parts of the system
to ensure that there is that coordinated approach, um,
that is balanced, where resources are being applied in the
way that delivers the most value,
where there is data available to evaluate
how well we're doing across each
of these different strategies.
And so our role in the elimination of Cerv cancer is
to actually be that kind of, um, overseer
and coordinator working with the Public health Agency,
national Public Health Service, and, uh, health New Zealand
as a whole, to develop the strategy, do some of the modeling
that's needed, the, the, the data modeling,
which tells us if we raise participation rates
and screening up to the target, what will
that translate into in terms of additional number
of patients requiring investigation,
and then diagnosis and treatment.
So we provide the data, uh, modeling around that,
which requires some economic forecasting and so on.
Um, we convene the partners together to look at the results
and then make decisions on what adjustments we need
to make in the various strategies around prevention,
screening, and, and diagnosis and treatment.
Um, and again, we are the, the sort of insurer of
that kind of coordinated strategy,
which is the only way we're going to be able
to move forward on achieving the targets.
So each of those partners have a very clear role
to play towards the objectives.
We come in as the Cancer Control Agency
to provide some additional data and evidence and modeling,
but also to help ensure we pull them all together,
develop the coordinated strategy, agree on the targets,
and then monitor and evaluate as we move forward.
Hopefully that helps provide a bit more insight
Supplementary on exactly that, that point.
So, uh, my colleague raises a question
that comes across in this committee quite often, trying
to understand how the different parts
of the health system work together.
And let's take the example of hpv mm-hmm. Vaccination.
We are not doing well enough with our vaccination rates
to be able to eliminate cervical cancer.
Mm-hmm. Uh, I haven't seen, um, coordinated
action to raise vaccination.
Mm-hmm. Uh, rates.
Can you spell out for us that convening
what's actually going on in those conversations?
Um, how, how is it that you get accountability out
of Health New Zealand for, for the fact that the, um,
school, uh, school get vaccination, um,
program is not delivering results? Yeah,
No, absolutely. And thank
you for that, Dr. Farrell.
Um, I think it, with, with the, it's important
with the elimination of cervical cancer strategy to,
to clarify that we are, we just actually kicked this off,
uh, in the last couple of months.
So even though obviously vaccination
and screening has been happening for some time,
but, um, we finally sort of came together the PHA,
the MPHS and us,
and said, okay, let's develop this framework around
how we're gonna going to work together.
Let's define the roles, um, that each
of the agencies are going to have.
Um, and then develop the, the, the timeline.
So what are the specific initiatives that we need to push
for and how do we evaluate and so on.
So the reason that we haven't had a coordinated, um,
approach is that that hasn't been in place.
Uh, it has been kind of a separate initiatives, uh,
thus far, which is why we need
to have the coordinated approach now.
So I, I think now that we have this framework
and we have the structure, we can start to bring data
to bear and we can start
to do some scenarios around, so what is it?
Where are the gaps in vaccination?
We know that there are, that,
that vaccination rates are not, um,
uniform across the country.
We know that there are under vaccinated, um, communities.
We know that there are strategies to help, um, improve, uh,
and reduce the gap there.
And so now we're going to be able to bring data
to bear some good modeling
and conversations between the three organizations, uh,
to help us move forward in that way.
So we're, we're hopeful. Thank you.
Well kind of supplement
that we've talked about cervical cancer,
but also, um, I think on the same page
of banner review is investigating the role
of lung screening project with Health New Zealand
through advice, resources,
and data to identify potential pathways.
And kind of really the same question I appreciate,
we're kind of very focused on cervical cancer now,
if we just move to, to the role of,
of the Cancer Control Agency
and in investigating the role of a lung screening program.
Okay. Um, so I think those are screening is, is maybe,
maybe I'll clarify and then
I'll come, come to your question.
So, um, screening is, is a, a, a part
of the continuum that happens to have sort of very defined
responsibilities for the policy development,
for the commissioning and planning
and delivery through the public health agency
and the National Public Health Service, uh, health service.
There is a national screening advisory committee,
which has the representation from those, all
of those organizations plus, uh, independent, uh,
clinicians and advisors.
And we are part of that larger process.
Um, so we feed into that.
We don't have, um, other than, than in this elimination
of cervical cancer, uh, example, we don't have, um,
a leading responsibility in any of that.
We are there to support,
to provide data and evidence and so on.
So screening is, is a part unlike other areas where
sort of diagnosis treatment, where we have,
we're actually responsible for informing the policy
through models of care through optimal cancer pathways.
Screening is one, we're, we're more in the advisory role.
So just, just to kind of define that,
because of the nature of the way that the,
the system is already organized, um, with lung screening,
there is a, there's a pilot project, um, which is, uh,
underway, which is looking at
how do we implement lung cancer screening in New Zealand.
The pilot is, is providing some important data
and information that will help inform us
and inform the development of, uh,
a possible program in the country.
We participate, um, on the steering committee, um,
that is overseeing the, the pilot
and providing advice to government on how
to move forward potentially on lung cancer screening.
So we continue to, to be sort of, uh, an additional source
of advice and input, um, into that work.
We have, obviously, connections internationally,
and that's another role that we bring, which is we,
we often bring international experts, so around modeling,
for example, which we're a bit behind on compared
to countries like Canada and Australia.
So we bring those experts in to give advice on how
to develop some of the methodologies, uh, around the data
and evaluation and modeling.
Um, so that's kind of where we, we come in from a, um, in,
in the lung cancer screening
and in the screening, um, um, domain, uh, as a whole.
So right now with lung cancer screening,
we're still exploring opportunities
for potentially implementing a program in
New Zealand. Mm-hmm.
And just one more, something, it is all kind of trying
to kind of tease out how everybody in interacts.
And then in your introduction,
you talked about the Linux machines, um,
and you are saying that you are working you out
the best place to put them.
Are you saying Health New Zealand won't put them in the
proper place if you didn't exist?
Um, no, I'm not saying that at all.
Um, I'm saying that we have,
because we have the, the, within the cancer control agency,
we have the, um, technical
and subject matter expertise around radiation, uh,
oncology planning, uh, around the data
and the, the, the forecasting models that are needed
to predict where,
what the demand will be across the country, and
therefore what the capacity should be.
We have the advisory bodies.
So we have the, the, the clinicians, radiation oncologists,
radiation therapists, physicists,
and those networks that are already organized, um,
that help provide advice to informing the, um,
the planning for those Linux.
So we already have all
of those structures from a content knowledge,
methodological knowledge,
and clinical advisory structures that allow us to move, um,
very quickly to provide that kind of advice.
If, if we didn't exist, health Museum would have
to build all of those from scratch,
and we'll have to build them for every part
of the cancer system that they're working on,
which is probably not an efficient model, um, given
that you have that, that sort
of critical mass within the cancer control agency.
But surely you are getting the data from Health
New Zealand?
Um, yes and no.
Yes, we actually have, the data is, so we have within,
so we've, with radiation oncology, for example,
the data on radiation oncology utilization is part
of the Can Share program, which is a data platform that we,
that we, uh, developed within the cancer control agency
and that we oversee and manage.
So it is, we are the custodians of, of that data.
It's not Health New Zealand data.
Uh, obviously it belongs to the country as a whole, but,
but it, it's, it's within, uh, our data holdings, uh,
environment in that example. Got
A couple of sub Anna, Jenny, thank you.
Um, I just wanted to look at the screening again.
'cause you've, you've shared
that you've got like a supportive role in that space
and, um, because things are already organized mm-hmm.
Um, do you take an evaluation or a review function
and you monitor the performance of that system
and the way that it is organized?
Um, can you explain, you know, is the way
that the system is organized for screening effective
and reducing in inequities?
Yeah, so we do have an oversight, uh, an evaluation, uh,
responsibility we develop.
So we are just about to release a state
of cancer control report, which actually measures, uh,
screening participation rates
and looked at looks at the extent
to which they're delivering on, on their promise.
Uh, we are have, and, and, uh,
and we'll, we'll continue
to do some deep dives into specific topics from a
performance measurement perspective.
So developing reports on measures of,
of quality and outcomes.
Um, and we could, we could definitely do one
that is more focused on screening,
if that's, if that's helpful.
So we have a number of ways in which we do that kind
of evaluation and monitor monitoring
and, um, indicator development.
Um, and that, obviously equity is, is a critical, uh, a part
of that work where we look not just at
how the system is performing as a whole,
but how are different groups within the system doing,
including, um, body
and Pacific peoples, uh, including people, um,
in living in rural, uh, communities, including, uh, people,
uh, belong in, in, in the high deprivation, um, uh,
communities and so on.
And we, and all of our data is broken down
so we can actually highlight where the gaps, uh, are
and sort of help the system, um, move forward on those.
And so, just thinking about, yeah, sorry.
Your objective, sorry. Um,
and in the, in the action plan, uh, how do you think
that you're tracking strategically in terms
of achieving those goals?
Uh, the general goals or equity goals?
Uh, all of it. I mean,
there is the equity goal in particular.
Yeah. And we know Maori Pacific particularly feature across
all of, um, where, where we are tracking
still highly impacted.
Um, but how, how do you believe
that you are achieving the goals for the date?
And Yeah. Um,
because you've got, you are,
you are looking across the system.
So, um, absolutely no doubt you've got your own view in
terms of how they could be holding you back
and achieving your objective.
Yeah, no, absolutely.
Um, so may I'll give a, a an answer on the overall progress,
uh, because we have done that, we've done that stock take.
And, uh, maybe I'll, I'll turn it over to Sasha
to give a bit more, um, information on the equity progress.
On the equity objective specifically.
We did, so the, the cancer action plan in 2019 had 67
actions, uh, in it across the continuum from prevention
to end of life care and data and,
and, uh, technology and so on.
Uh, we did a stock take of progress against those actions,
uh, in the five year, um, sort of point.
So 20, 24, and, um, about around 50%
of the actions, uh, we've shown considerable progress on
the other 50%, uh, are either partial progress
or no progress at all.
And the areas that we did not make progress on, um, as much
as we'd like, are the, the areas sort of outside
of the direct sort of treatment side of things.
So prevention, early detection, outside of screening, um,
providing support to survivors
after the end of treatment, palliative care,
and end of life care, um, care coordination
and navigation, providing support, uh,
like transportation support and so on.
And, and equity, uh, is another area
that we have not made progress on as, as much as we'd like.
But, um, so anything to add that,
Uh, yeah, the pro progress is mixed.
I think if you're looking specifically at equity gaps,
and it's been noted a number of times that there are
gaps in across all areas of the cancer continuum.
As you go into some of the more granular measures, some
of those gaps are reducing, but they have not disappeared.
So the reduction is a good step,
but there still remains a gap.
Uh, in other cases, it's gone the other way.
We have seen, um, improvements and,
and in other spaces we haven't.
So it's not a consistent pattern across all
of the different measures and monitors that we look at.
In some cases, we're doing well,
but have more to do in other spaces.
Yeah. We, we need to lift the
Game. Just thinking in
terms of a, a access is,
um, one of the barriers.
Um, and thinking about rural communities, um, even those
with disabilities, you know, um, how,
how do we feature in terms of, um, you know,
closing the gaps to make it easier for whanau
with significant challenges to come and access the,
and I'd say screening first, if we can try and Yep.
Look at the screening space.
Yeah. Uh, are you happy for me to take that? Sure. Yep.
Um, the state of Cancer 2020 report, which was the first
big report that we did, um, it noted
that there was very limited evidence, uh, of, and,
and data available about the outcomes, the cancer outcomes
for disabled people, uh, that, that they were one of a,
a number of groups that we noted
that there wasn't a lot of evidence available.
And so, in the time since then, we've developed a program
of work called Population Insights, where we are looking
to start to fill some of those evidence gaps.
Um, the next state of cancer report will share some
of the emerging evidence that we have,
in particularly in the space
around disabled people affected by cancer.
Um, within the literature that's been published nationally
and internationally, a lot of it focuses on screening.
Um, and there are a number of barriers
and challenges that disabled people face in that space.
Some of it is logistical, some of it is attitudinal,
some of it is systemic.
Um, that literature as well
as the data analysis that we are working on at the moment,
does appear to show that there are a number of issues
for disabled people affected by cancer.
Um, but we are just double checking all of the numbers
to make sure that
before we share them in the next state of cancer.
Well done, Jenny.
Ah, thank you. Just, um, supplementary on the, um,
screenings, um, train of, uh, uh,
progress we're making here in committee.
Um, could you talk about your, uh, relationships
with NGOs, uh, prostate, um, cancer Foundation?
Obviously it was blue September,
we held an event in Parliament, um,
and it was good to see a chair there
and a num number of members
from the committee that attended.
Um, could you talk about your relationship with those kinds
of organizations and in particular, around
prostate greening, which is what they're asking for, to,
for two trial projects, to, to, to go Sure.
Notion. We do have a members bill that we're really keen
to come out of the biscuit
and, um, for a pilot project. Well,
Thank you for that Question. Testing.
Yeah. Yep.
Um, so maybe I, I'll I'll address the, uh,
relationship with the NGOs.
Yes. Uh, first, um, so we, we do have a, um, uh,
an ongoing sort of constructive
and open, um, uh, communicative relationship with, uh,
cancer NGOs.
We work, uh, primarily through cango, which is the, uh,
the main NGOs for, for Cancer, the main association
of cancer related NGOs that has Prostate Cancer Foundation,
breast Cancer Foundation, uh, leukemia
and Blood Cancer, New Zealand Cancer
Society, and others on it.
Um, and we coordinate very closely with that.
It's, it's just easier to work with that group that looks at
the, the cancer system as a whole.
Um, and, and because we, obviously, our remit is all
of cancer control, we're not looking at specific types
of cancer, uh, although obviously a lot
of our efforts are focused.
So Tango allows us to engage all of these NGOs together
around the forum and talk about priorities
and where there's opportunities to, to work together
and move forward on things.
We, we also have a very strong relationship
with the New Zealand Cancer Society, um, uh,
a among others as well.
Breast Cancer Foundation.
We've done, uh, a lot of work together, um, on, uh,
for example, the Breast Quality Performance
Indicators report.
That is, um, that was released a few months ago.
That was a collaboration with the Breast Cancer Foundation
and utilized, uh, data from the,
the Breast Cancer Foundation's, um, registrar
for Cancer Information.
Um, so that's in general
with the Prostate Cancer Foundation.
We've, we've, I've, you know, I've met with, with,
um, them several times.
Um, so I, I, I'm always open to meeting with, with, uh,
the NGOs and hearing, uh, about their issues
and their priorities and, and, uh,
and seeing where there's opportunities where we can kind
of leverage, uh, the knowledge that they bring.
Um, and so, yeah, I think I've met
with the Prostate Cancer Foundation at least four
or five times in the last, um, couple of years, um,
on prostate cancer screening.
So obviously, when we decide to move forward, uh,
on a screening program, we want to make sure
that it is strongly supported by, by evidence,
because screening,
like any intervention in cancer comes, comes with harms.
Um, they always do all of, you know, any screening program,
uh, can, has exposure to harm.
So in a, in the, in the case of prostate cancer, um, if you,
so we, we, we have a, a blood test, which is the PSA test,
which identifies, um, whether there's elevated level, uh, of
that, uh, um, prostate factor.
And then if there are elevated levels, then you move on
to further investigations, which include a biopsy.
The biopsy, um, has, comes with a risk of infection, um,
which, which could, you know, lead
to some serious harms to the patients.
If you're over testing
and over referring, then you're doing a lot
of unnecessary biopsies, uh,
for patients who may not need it.
So that's an example of where you want to make sure
that the screening program, the benefits of
that program outweigh the risks.
And in prostate cancer, PSA based testing,
the international evidence is not yet at the level, um,
that supports a population based screening program.
That's why, um, there's really only one country in the
world, um, that has a, um,
a prostate cancer screening program.
Um, and, uh, one and a half countries, Kazakhstan
and Lithuania, um, none of the others do,
because they're all looking, watching the evidence when the,
the evidence is progressing.
And there are some promising large, uh, uh,
studies in Europe that we're observing and looking at, and,
and seeing when it tips over, um, potentially to
where it becomes, um, justifiable, uh,
as a population-based program.
And that's, that's kind of the work that we're doing
to help bring that advice to bear on the decision making.
Alright, Asha? Yeah,
Thanks, Mr.
Chair. I have a, a number of questions, uh,
in your introduction, you know,
to declining overall incident,
but survival improvements, not keeping up with the world,
uh, that suggests our treatment of people with,
uh, cancer is not what it should be.
Why isn't cancer survival in New Zealand improving as fast
as it is elsewhere in the world?
Thanks, Dr. Burrow. Really important question.
So, there are two main drivers of, of survival,
and two, two main things have to happen to improve survival.
The first is detecting cancers early, at an early stage
where they are more likely to be curable.
And the second is to have effective access
to effective treatment that actually treats those cancers
and ensure that, uh, they are, uh, cured to, to,
to deliver on that, um, you know, on that survival outcome.
So I think we have challenges in New Zealand on both sides,
on the early detection side,
and on the, um, phylaxis to treatment
on the early detection, it's important to remember that
early detection is not just about screening.
So we have screening programs for bowel,
breast, and cervical.
Um, but there are many cancers that are not screenable,
and they manifest themselves in some symptoms.
Um, and the patient present, uh,
a primary care, um, primarily.
Um, and then there's, there should be a, a process, uh,
within primary care to investigate those symptoms, uh,
and where necessary, refer the patients to some
investigations, radiology, labs, work, and,
and a specialist, uh, consultations to actually get
to the point where there's cancer or not.
I think that's where we have
the biggest challenge in New Zealand.
And that's, um, that's really supported by the, uh, the
analysis we did in the route to diagnosis report that showed
that we have the highest percentage of cancer patients
amongst all of our peer countries
who are diagnosed in the emergency department.
And that is a marker for, uh, a primary care system
that is not supported enough to actually, um,
identify those cases early on.
And, and it's not just, I, I don't want
to be at all saying this is all on gps
because we do have, we have a, a shortage of, of,
um, GPS in this country.
We have, uh, barriers around access to primary care.
We have barriers around access to radiology.
Um, um, and, and so we have long wait times there.
And all of those contribute to, um, our limited ability
to ensure that cancers are identified in the community in
primary care care, early, at an early stage can be treated.
Uh, and that's, that's the biggest driver really at this
point, because what, when we compare, uh, data to the, the
Biggest driver of the survival, not keeping
Up of survival, survival,
goodness, not, not moving as fast,
Not the lack of access to medicines.
I think medicines for the most part, outside
of blood cancers, um, uh, as you know,
medicines are about sort
of extending life more than, more than cure.
Um, and, and that's important.
So that's where patients
with advanced disease can benefit from an additional sort
of number of months
or sometimes years of life
through these advanced medicine medicines.
So that does increase the survival.
It doesn't necessarily increase the chance of cure.
Uh, it just adds important, really important for,
I don't wanna diminish that for, for the FAU dealing with,
with ca advanced Cancer.
Those months are precious, are important.
Um, and, but we're not talking about cure here.
We're talking about additional time.
Thank, thank you. And then the, on, on the, um, I,
every time a cancer official comes to this committee,
I ask this question.
I Google cancer survival,
and I still find, uh, statistics on cancer survival, uh,
from 2029, I think
of me 11 was the last survival report
that is on the Health New Zealand website.
Uh, I know mortality is reported. Mm-hmm.
Survival gives us, as you have just explained,
that insight into weather.
Our systems are working. Why don't we report
survival in a rigorous, regular way when, you know,
everyone agrees that's a major issue.
Yeah, no, uh, absolutely. I agree with you.
It is the main measure of outcomes.
Um, we do have, actually, we,
we've reported survival within the agency up to 2021.
So when we're looking at survival, we're looking at, um,
the chance of surviving five years.
So you need to actually have a, be able
to look ahead to look at
That's not on, sorry, sorry.
Just because I am fixated on this too.
Where, where is that, what's, what report is,
are you publishing occasional reports on survival,
not a routine report?
Is that why I can't find it when I look,
It will be in the state of, of cancer report
that's coming out in November.
We will have survival up to 2021 for,
and we'll actually show the improvement from 98 99 to 2021,
uh, 22, I think.
Um, so that's going to be in our state of cancer report.
I'll check if it's, if that data is on our website or not.
Um, but yes, so we do have survival up to that
Year. That's good. And is
this, is this
what you would call routine reporting?
It's not routine reporting of survival. Right.
Because I can't find it anywhere you are.
Take doing a one-off report on survival,
which is good and valuable.
Yeah. Thank, thank you.
And then the regional variations you mentioned in your
introduction, this was a source of significant concern
to me when I was minister.
Um, what are the sorts of things that you see
that differ across the country that give rise to these
regional variations?
Mm-hmm.
And that, that's a really important, uh, question.
And as we all know, the, the,
the health reforms were intended, uh, largely to,
to eliminate those variations that, that postcode lottery
through the creation of health New Zealand,
a single health authority for the country.
And, um, it has, it has taken some time, as you know,
for those changes to, to get established and Tibet in,
and in some cases, we're still in that kind
of transition from a district centered centric kind of way
of, of, of managing, um, and,
and delivering care to that, well, first of all,
a regional approach first as opposed to district approach
and then a national approach.
I think we still have work to do to, um, better
match, um, demand and supply, so capacity and,
and need, uh, within regions across districts.
Um, and we're moving in that direction.
We're still not there.
We have situations where, like we look at Canterbury, um,
and Southern, um, where, um, you know,
Southern might have additional Linac capacity for radiation,
but not, not, uh, enough radiation oncologists.
Um, and, uh, Canterbury is the other way around.
Um, so how can we work better together to kind
of pool those resources to make sure
that we are utilizing the regional capacity
and not still operating as individual, um, districts.
And that's a process that Health
New Zealand has been moving towards.
I think that will help to eliminate some
of those variations that you're talking about.
Some people have to move to different parts of the country
to have their treatment.
That's, um, understood.
But is the, is the issue that those parts of
it's the South island just haven't had the long,
you know, over decades, the investment in their cancer
services so that they enough to look
after the people that they now, now have?
Is that, is that a fair commentary on, on Canterbury
and Southern Cancer, both of which are,
I think, I think it's a fair commentary on, on the, the,
the system as a whole.
And it's, and it's not, this is not in New Zealand.
So one thing I didn't mention is
the growth in, in cancer demand.
Um, so we, this year we should have about 30,000, uh,
new cases of cancer diagnosed in 2025.
In the next 15 years, we're going up to 45,000.
That's a huge increase.
And so this is, this is largely driven by demographics,
so aging, growing population, um,
but also the complexity of cancer treatment is going up,
and the cost of cancer
treatment is going up at the same time.
So all of this is putting pressure on, on all countries
to respond by having enough clinicians,
enough infrastructure machines.
And of course, I agree with you on these, these things.
Yes. But my, my question was, uh,
are the services in Southern
and Canterbury too small, um,
demand they have and that that appears
to be markedly so compared there
Are, yeah, no, there are, there are
vacancies that, that need to be filled.
Absolutely. Yeah. I don't, I too small in terms
of economies of scale.
I don't, I, I, I don't know if, if you need
to build a bigger hospital, if that's, if that's
what we're talking about, I think we need to rightsize the,
the workforce and,
and I, maybe I should say something about the,
the right sizing the workforce.
I think we need to work smarter, um, as well.
We can't hire enough doctors to, to respond to
that 45,000 cases that will, will be diagnosing it.
We just can't do it. It's just not going to happen.
So we need to work in a more efficient way, which,
which goes back to training nurses, uh,
clinical nurse specialists, to actually take on some of
that lower scope of practice that allows the doctors,
the specialists to focus on the more complex part of their,
their, um, um, scope of practice.
So we need to do that with nurses, radiation technologists,
there's an opportunity for them to kind of shift into some
of that radiation oncologists scope of practice.
So how do we shift the workforce models of care to
get more out of our workforce
As someone else wants To? So
I don't think it's just the size issue.
I think it's, it's a, it's how we utilize
and how we work more, more intelligently.
Great. We've got, um, hands up from Carlos, cam, Greg,
Jenny, Asha still has questions.
Anna.
Thank you, chair. Um, my, my, my question related
to the workforce, according to your annual report,
the employees sufficient have dropped certificate from 84%
to 72%,
and the turnover rates have progressive
progressively increased over the past three years.
Could you give us a little bit explanation or,
or explain reason behind these strengths?
Sorry, I just wanted to confirm, uh, uh,
employee satisfaction, um, in
Dropped from 84% to 70 Within
Our agency. Within our agency,
yes. Okay. Okay. Um, so yes.
Um, I think what we're, we're, uh, looking at, um,
two years ago versus three years ago,
because I think we had, we had an increase last year, uh,
in our, in our satisfaction rate.
So this is the 23, 24.
So we had a, um, um, that we had a high satisfaction,
I'm trying to remember the, the years that this might refer
To. I can, I can answer that
question if you like. Yeah.
Of, yeah. Um, so when the agency was established right at
the beginning, we, um, had a, a employee satisfaction rate
of around 89%, which was, um, pretty phenomenal really.
And maintaining that level we always knew was gonna be
pretty, pretty tough.
But we were pretty pleased the following year
that we had almost exactly the same rate.
We did have, it had, uh, a drop,
as you say, within that year.
That was, um, a year where there was a lot of change, uh,
in the system, uh, a change in, in the ministry
that we are embedded in.
Um, but still that 72%, uh, puts us, um,
at one of the highest satisfaction rates, um, across,
um, the public service.
So while, um, there was a drop there, uh,
it wasn't something that was particularly concerning.
What was, uh, important for us was to look at
where within those ratings, where there was a,
a particular drop, uh, in the subcategories
of survey and things like that.
And we've been putting quite a lot of attention,
um, into those areas.
Um, and we're about to do, uh, well,
the email came out yesterday
for the next, the survey for this year.
So we'll be looking that again in terms of your question
around turnover, um, we did have quite a lot
of a higher turnover within the 23, 24 year
that that annual report covers.
Um, so we did dig into our data around that.
Uh, and, um, the vast majority, I think, apart from one
of those turnover was people go moving on to a, um,
higher role, you know, career progression.
And that is also something in our organization
that we've been aware of from the start.
But as a quite a small organization,
we don't have the ability to promote internally
to have opportunities for people to move internally.
So it's almost been something we've kind of had
to embrace is that we will grow people
within our organization who may go on to other roles,
bigger roles and,
and make a contribution in the health system
or across the public service more generally,
but also to support that we have, uh, implemented
for the first time last year, an internal promotion round,
to try and give people the ability to, um, yeah, to, uh,
have growth within their career
and stay within our organization.
Also, can I, uh, Superman chair.
Um, so the, what, what policy or, or, or
or plan have you been implemented to address the,
the inclusive workplace as well?
And also, um, you, you've got a percentage drop on, uh,
people behave in acceptable manner
to people from diverse background.
Do you have any plan to address this?
Um,
in terms of the survey results, that hasn't, uh,
been an area that where there has been a dramatic, uh,
change, I don't think it's
From 80 93% drop to 80%.
I think what we have, uh, in our survey survey results,
because we only have a small number of people, um,
in our organization, is that, uh, sort of, we have quite
dramatic changes in our results based on sort of individual
people making a change.
Um, across the board though,
those results are still very, very high.
So, um, it is, it is an area that we,
uh, do, we do focus on.
We do have policies around, um, that mostly
that we adopt from Ministry of Health, um, policies,
but around bullying and, um, and diversity.
Um, but generally,
and certainly in the, um, public service census mm-hmm.
Um, which is different from that survey result,
uh, we rate very highly.
Can I just, Just one more sub.
So do you think all this factor contribute
to your high percentage of turnover rate?
No. From all this, you know, um, satisfaction rate,
inclusive work pay, they, they all drop the performance.
So you don't think this is the
cost lead to your high turnover
Rates? No. Certainly
from exit interview information, um,
there's been no indication that that is a problem
for us as an agency.
Do a sub on that? Yes. Yeah. This is sub on, on, on staff.
Um, I do believe you have 60, uh, team members.
Can you give us a breakdown of what, what areas
they work in, whether it be admin, data policy,
et cetera? Yeah,
Sure. Um,
so we're organized in a, in a sort of a bit of a,
a matrix model.
I'll, I'll explain what that looks like.
We have, um, a regional, um, office, uh,
regional hub structure to make sure that we are, um,
working very closely with the, our regional partners
and reflective of the needs, the variations of needs in,
in different parts of the country.
So we have, uh, four regional teams, uh, one in in Auckland
for the north, um, one in Hamilton for, uh, Midlands,
one in Palmerston, north for Central,
and one in Christchurch, uh, for TUI Panum.
So that's, that's one part of the structure is
that is the regional offices
that have really strong relationships with the
providers from a Health New Zealand perspective, hospitals,
um, commodity providers and, and others in those regions.
Then we have our, our sort of functional, um, uh,
structure within, uh, within our central office,
within the national office.
And we're organized, uh, along this sort of knowledge,
what we call the knowledge to action pathway.
So we have, uh, people in the data
and analytics team that actually oversee a lot
of those data systems development projects,
like the radiation oncology data
and the, the chemotherapy data, uh, systems
that we're building for clinicians and for policymakers.
Then we have a system performance
and innovation team moving along from knowledge creation
to knowledge synthesis that take all of this information
and produce, um, reports on
how well the system is doing evaluations, uh, of progress,
uh, looking at, at, uh, you know,
measuring against targets and so on.
So that's, that's our, the system performance.
Then we have our, our knowledge translation implementation
team, which actually takes that, that knowledge
that's been synthesized
and works with the system to help ensure
that it's being used to improve and,
and inform how services are funded, organized, uh, resourced
and, and, and delivered in the system working
with primarily Health New Zealand.
So, um, that kind of knowledge to action pathway is
how our teams are organized to ensure
that we've got that continuum.
We're not just producing academic reports.
Everything we do has a defined implementation plan
associated with it that ensures
that it gets taken up and implemented.
Then we have a, uh, an equity and, and, uh, uh, final
and person centered care team that ensures that, uh,
we are listening to consumers and, and patients and families
and engaging them effectively in informing our work.
Um, and then we have a small, um, office of the deputy CE
that sort of manages our government relations, um,
and, um, uh, things like communications
and, uh, and media and so on.
Hmm. So there's about five groups you've mentioned there.
Do you have a rough percentage of
how your staff is broken down into those five areas?
The, the similar in size, more
or less between four. I mean,
So if we look at the regional hubs, so those,
those four groups is broadly five people
in each of those hubs.
Each of those hubs has a manager, three project managers,
uh, and an administrative,
they're called project coordinators.
Um, sort of administrative role. Is
That four regions?
Yes, that's right. Um,
and then within our, um, Wellington office,
we have, um, uh, the three of us
who are in executive leadership, um, sort
of senior leadership team,
and then we have three, what we call program team managers.
And each of those teams will have between,
let's say, three to six, um, advisors,
project managers, or, um, and the data team
and all the data analysts.
And we have, uh, three,
three and a half, um, administrative staff, uh, no,
plus two executive assistants within the Wellington office.
Um, so that's sort of the, that's not, sorry, I, I had to do
that by going through, through each one rather than come out
with an overall percentage.
But that's, that's kind of our span.
And maybe, maybe we should mention that many of our staff,
uh, have clinical backgrounds.
So we have, um, we have chief
Advisor advisors. Yeah,
we have our chief advisors around clinical, um, and,
and Maori and policy,
but we also have, uh, many of our, uh, principal advisors
question public health doctors.
Um, uh, we have nurses, we have radiation technologists,
we have pharmacists on, on staff.
We have a lot of policy experience as well,
but also that clinical background, which is important,
And one of the areas we have,
I'm gonna, I'm, I think we can probably manage, wanted
through poster questions so you can be more explicit.
Great. Oh, cool. Cam,
Thank you chair. Um,
yeah. Cool. Thanks guys.
I've got a, just a question about, um, financials,
your revenue, um, and your expenditure.
Like, congratulations on having a surplus, um,
two budgets in a row.
Uh, the 20 23, 24 and 2223.
Mm-hmm. Um, what's happening with that surplus?
Yeah, it's got about five, it's just under 5 million. Yeah.
Um, sorry, 5 million.
Well, according to what, well,
this sort of comes to a problem.
Um, in the annual report, there's a lot of, uh, data about,
you know, um, staff experience, the amount
of wire one can sing, doesn't have a lot of financials.
Mm. And so I've had to try
and find some, in some data on that.
The best I can come up with is, um, is
what the OAG has been able to report on.
So I guess the first question actually,
why is financials not part of your annual report?
So, our financials are reported in the Ministry of Health,
um, annual report
because all of our fi uh, finances come through Vote Health
through the Ministry of Health.
Um, and so our annual report is, um,
essentially non-financial, which is attached as an, uh,
appendix or addendum to the ministry one.
So if you want to see the
financials that's in the Ministry of Health,
Do you think it would be clear?
Yeah. So the, the committee probably didn't have access
to that, uh, right.
As much as we should have, I would've thought.
Um, then that follows on with the question
that my colleague, Dr. Campbell asked about
how many staff are and what,
'cause we, you know, again, we can see
how many people can introduce themselves and today all
and how staff satisfaction, um,
about supportive and inclusive workplaces,
but not about funding or staffing levels.
I feel that's, so I guess the question to ask then is
how would you see, uh, the spending being allocated
to your objectives mm-hmm.
Um, lay down the cancer action plan?
Sure. So we have, so our budget, um, is 13
and a half million dollars, um, annually.
One and a half million of that, um, goes to the Ministry
of Health as part of our hosting agreement.
So they provide all of the back office,
we don't have any back office functions, so finance, it, hr,
payroll, all of that is managed by the Ministry of Health.
What do your five admin staff do?
Uh, so that's, that's supporting the, the work that,
the clinical work that we do, the, not, not the,
uh, not back office work.
Um, and so staff, then the remaining, uh,
part is, is a combination of, of payroll.
So for the 65 FTDs that we have, 65 plus
or minus fts that we have.
Um, and then, uh, uh,
some funding agreements we have with key partners.
So we fund the National Child Cancer Network, um,
to do the work, uh, around, um, child cancer, uh, uh,
policy, the adolescents
and young adults with Cancer Network as well, uh,
that do really important, um, uh, research work, uh,
around young people.
With cancer. So we've got a number of these, um,
funding arrangements overall.
And so from memory, um, our salary budget, um,
I may be mixing up numbers
because it's, I'm thinking back to 23, 24 rather than 24, 25
where we are now, but it's around about 8.9 million.
So of the, the money that we have, so the vast majority
of our finances is, uh, is being spent on internal
permanent staff.
Um, and then in the 2324 year, we had a $1.9 million, um,
surplus at the end, which was returned to the center.
Okay. So how would the committee have used the funding,
uh, and analyze how you are achieving your measures,
funding that's been provided.
How do you think we should assess your
performance based on spending?
'cause Yeah. Um, you know, fair enough,
you don't have the numbers to think about a couple years.
But, um, vagaries around these four different objectives,
um, different roles and targets and staffing units
and project leads programs, um, how do we know, uh,
if the spending is getting a result?
Yeah.
Can I, can I maybe answer it in, uh, in, in one way
and then, um, Nico or Sasha may add additional perspectives?
I'm gonna answer it from, from a big picture
perspective using an example.
Um, so again, our budget is 13 point a half million dollars.
Um, a couple of years ago, we produced a report, uh,
that identified the gap in the funding of drug medicines
between Australia and New Zealand.
And we identified, uh, 20 medicines
that were funded in Australia, not in New Zealand,
and met a minimum, um, clinical benefit threshold.
Um, meaning that they are, they are helpful for patients.
Um, that then the, the, the seven
of those drugs ended up being funded, leaving 13,
the famous 13 drugs that, um, ended up being, um, um, part
of a commitment, uh, election commitment made
around the funding, um, fast forward, um,
to the, uh, winter of 24, uh,
where the government then made the commitment
and then came to us and said, how do we get this done?
Um, so we worked very closely with, uh,
our partners at the Ministry
and Health New Zealand to help support that, that, um,
that funding policy, which resulted in $604 million being,
um, provided to uplift the pharmaceutical budget of,
of P Act and additional $188 million
to support the system in implementing those drugs.
Um, so that's,
I think I understand 13 million is not, you know,
in context of what we're talking about.
I, under, I I think it's the point you're trying to make.
Yeah. On my question is how do, like, how do we, you know,
we have, we vote mm-hmm.
To give a budget. Um, you've got four measures that, uh,
from the action plan for, for, um, objectives.
Um, what, how do we, how do we measure that you are
contributing to New Zealand experiencing equitable cancer
outcomes, um, based on yours, the things that your units do
or, um, how New Zealanders have fewer
cancers based on mm-hmm.
The work your units are doing.
I'm not, yeah, I'm not saying that there's a cost benefit,
um, to take or give money,
but I'm just saying, how do we actually
as a committee when we analyze whether you should get more
or less money save the cancer control, uh,
authority is doing X, which is contributing,
Right? Yeah.
I, I hear you.
And, um, and that, but I, I
provided that example just just
to demonstrate the, the contribution.
So we, our work resulted in
an additional $800 million in this case of, uh, investment
for cancer patients in the system as a result of that piece
of work that we did.
So I'm, I'm just trying to give a bit of a, one way
of measuring it is 13 million is getting you this much in
terms of additional investment
that may not have happened if we hadn't produced that work.
Now, that is one, one way of measuring it,
but I, I agree with you.
We're looking at all of the other measures and, um,
and that's, that's also important that maybe, um,
So you're saying that you are, the $13 million investment
led to an $800 million investment
Through discovering 20 cancer treatments,
Uh, 33 cancer treatments.
Yeah. Uh, and an additional 35, uh, non non-cancer, so
Supplementary Mr. Chair.
Um, can you, uh, describe
the, um, interdepartmental agency structure
and what the Public Finance Act reporting requirements are?
Because my colleagues asking very good questions,
but there are different requirements
for an interdepartmental agency under the
Public Finance Act.
Um, that is probably reasonably frustrating for,
for, for us, because most of these reviews,
we have a different set of information ahead of us.
Right. Okay. Um, are you comfortable answering that?
Sure. So I think it was, it's really what we were trying
to, what I was trying to explain before.
Um, so, uh, essentially we are our own, um,
organization reporting directly to the minister.
However, we are, um, all of our finances, all of our funding
and a, a large amount
of our reporting goes through the Ministry of Health.
So it is packaged within Ministry of Health information,
and that is, uh,
how departmental agencies are structured across the board.
So the likes of NEMA and, um, ti
and other, the, you know,
other departmental agencies have similar challenges in terms
of those reporting requirements.
Um, so in terms of what you, what you see, I guess.
But there may well be, I think you make a good point,
and there may well be things that we can, uh,
make clearer in our annual report, uh, in,
in times going forward, so that, so that we can make some
of those connections that you are trying,
that you are trying to seek as a committee.
Okay. I guess that, yeah, fine. I guess, yeah.
It's not a, it's, I don't mean by bringing money into it.
I wasn't trying to muddy the waters about whether we're
funding or not to get, I'm literally just trying
to figure out from reading this,
how like you've got outcomes, your priorities and your work.
The work is very, you know, it's, it's,
there's words that are just, you know, filler words
and like feeding back through Maori community Hui.
Like, there's not how many hui how much,
how many hours was spent.
Um, quality performance indicator program. That's great.
Um, what's the result from that?
How many people accessed it? You know? Yeah.
It's no really good points. I think we can, can,
That's something that's useful feedback for us
to take forward for future, um, reports. Yep.
Greg? Yeah. Um, thanks very much.
Um, just sort of supplementing more on a's question, um,
whose job and is it your job to ensure
that there's a consistency of treatment?
Um, and that the, any new innovations are being adopted by
the different agencies around New Zealand
and I some context to that?
I'm a, um, now a 18 year colorectal, um,
stage three cancer survivor.
And when I was being treated, um, I was being treated
with a new method, which I had all my treatment, uh,
chemotherapy and radiotherapy before my intervention.
Mm-hmm. And that was showing
that there was a five year increased survival rate, um,
as a result of that change.
And yet at the time there was some frustration
among the specialists that that wasn't being picked up
around the country and there were people
were dying unnecessarily.
Mm-hmm. Um, is it your job to ensure that
there is consistency of treatment?
Or if it's not, whose job is that to make sure that, um,
those like myself were fortunate enough to get that
new treatment, um, that that's available to all?
Thank you for that. And I,
and I'm pleased that the treatment was,
was effective in your case.
Um, um,
and yes, it's really important to ensure that, that these
clinical guidelines that are supported
by evidence are being adhered to in the, in the system by,
by clinicians and, and hospitals and cancer centers.
So it is part of our job to report on, uh,
and measure the extent to which these, um, these guidelines
and these, uh, recommendations are actually being
delivered to patients.
So in your case, we, we would measure,
and we have measured, uh, in our bowel cancer report,
the percentage of, of patients with stage three bowel cancer
who receive preoperative chemoradiation ahead
of their surgery because that actually, you know,
as you know, shrinks the tumor
and ensures that the surgical resection is, is likely
to be more effective, eliminating the cancer.
So that's the kind of work that we do is, is measuring, um,
the providing quality indicators
and reporting them to the system
and having clinicians look at them
and have discussions around, why is this happening?
Why is there variation? What can we do about it?
Uh, and how can we ensure that that it, um, it's addressed.
Now, health New Zealand obviously is ultimately responsible
for putting these measures in place
because they're the ones who, you know, are responsible for
delivery of treatment and, and,
and funding and resourcing it.
But we have a responsibility to, um, report on how well
that's happening and,
and have discussions bring clinicians together
to discuss ways for how to do things better.
So who would identify the oncologist who wasn't doing it?
Um, Who, who was sticking to the old methods
and with the results? Your job?
No, not, not the individual clinician.
So it's, there's a cascade.
So we would, we would report on how the country's doing,
and then we do it by district.
So we would then compare, you know, how is Wellington, uh,
how does it compare to Palmerston North?
How does it compare to, to Waikato and so on.
And then within Wellington, the clinical group
around bowel cancer will get, will, hopefully their job is
to come together, look at the results,
compare why maybe the results are not as high
as they might be in, in, in other districts.
And then do the, the drill down analysis potentially
by clinician to look at where things are happening.
We don't report by clinician.
We report at the national and and hospital district.
Alright. Thank you. Alright.
I've got great, I've got her harness. Thank you.
I'll want to, um, uh, you mentioned you work with,
with fac, um, uh, really New Zealand First
National and the ACT part, the coalition, uh, we made
that coalition agreement to increase the, uh, funding
for pc, um, which resulted in those 33
cancer medicines, a range
of other medicines being able to be rolled out.
Um, can you tell me about your work, uh,
with p your relationship with p uh, frustrations, perhaps
with p uh, when we look at some, uh, other comparable
countries which have, uh, standard
of care medicines not available here,
but might be sitting on the OFI list, um, and,
and what work you are doing to try
to get greater visibility, uh, and get those other medicines
and treatments, um, out the door for patients. Mm-hmm.
Thank you for that question.
Um, so we have a, a very good relationship with far, uh, um,
I meet with the chief executive on a, on a monthly basis.
Um, and we talk about the work that's underway
and how we can collaborate, um,
and ensure that we bring, keep each other up
to up to date on what's happening.
We also have, uh, working groups.
Um, so for example, we have a, an executive oversight group
that is overseeing the implementation of those 33 drugs,
cancer drugs, supporting the system
to actually deliver them, uh, in an effective way.
And pharma is, is at the table, as is Health New Zealand
and, uh, the ministry and,
and us, um, we work with 'em.
And, uh, so for example, there's a, um,
an exciting opportunity for, um, CAR T therapy, which is a,
a new type of therapy for, for blood cancers that, um, uh,
is now under clinical trial, uh, in New Zealand.
And, uh, we're working with,
we're overseeing an advisory committee with p
to look at the process
and NetSafe, how do we then bring
that then exciting new therapy, uh, to through the process
of approval and funding so it can be made available.
So it's just examples of where, where we work, um,
with Pharm Act in different ways.
Um, obviously the Pharm Act model is, uh, is a model
that is, you know, based on, uh, this independent, um,
assessment of, uh, the benefit of, of different medicines
that are, um, um, sort of, uh, added to the options
for investment list to the OFI.
And that process is by design
and by necessity, um, you know, confidential.
We don't, as a cancer control agency, um,
we don't tell pharma what they should do, uh, at all.
That's really their, their prerogative.
Um, we might produce a report like we did, which says,
you know, here are some drugs that are funded in Australia,
but not in New Zealand.
We did that for blood cancers. We did that for solid tumors.
And that information becomes available to pharma
and others, uh, to incorporate into their decision making.
They have many, many others,
other considerations in their decision making
besides whatever advice we might give.
Uh, and ultimately that that decision is made, um,
within the, the kind of the framework, uh,
that they've developed, uh, internally.
So
Can I just jump in on that?
So, so do you feel that your agency,
the Cancer Control agency, has enough,
enough teeth in that space?
If you are just purely advisory?
Mean, our function is our, our, our mandate is
to provide advice, um, and provide evidence, um,
and synthesize the evidence
and bring clinical experts together to provide advice.
That is, we are an advisory, uh, agency by definition,
we don't have any authority to, to fund or,
or issue policy.
So it's, it's sort of part of who we are. Mm-hmm.
Um, um, I think
that the teeth aspect is, is an interesting question.
I I think we still have a lot of influence.
Um, we have a lot of credibility in the system.
Uh, the reports that we produce, the guidance that we,
we produce is, is valued.
Um, and, um, it's seen as, as being rigorous and robust.
So, so our influence is by the, the strength of,
and the rigor of the advice, uh,
and the analysis that we produce and,
and make available to the system.
But we can compel anybody to do anything. Um,
Yeah. Um, thank
you. I, sorry, I just wanna pick up on, um,
my colleague's point, which I think is a good one.
And this question isn't a challenge of PX independence.
I think that's really important.
The point is though, that that report that you wrote
identified a bunch of medicines
that weren't even on the options for investment list.
And pharma is passively receiving applications, um,
from pharmaceutical companies that are, um, around
what, uh, for being listed.
And that process might not put on the, well,
it does not put on the op opportunities for investment.
Options for investment list are things that, um,
are consistent with international best practice
as you identified
or might be strategic priorities New Zealand has
for the health system.
So that function has
been with you and as a cancer agency, that, that challenge
and that, that pointing to the gaps in,
in the options for investment list.
Mm-hmm. Is that the right place for that function?
Could pharma hold, should pharma hold that function?
Are you filling a gap, it seems to me
to be really important, um, that
that farm has a better options
for investment list than it currently, currently does.
I, I'm, I'm, I understand what you're saying and,
and, um, I'm not going to directly comment on what PX should
or should not do.
However it is, um, I think it's fair to,
um, ask whether PX mandate
and how they work should move from a more sort
of passive role around being the receiver of applications
to the OFI and being a more proactive,
having a more proactive role in terms of actually scanning
and examining and analyzing
and assessing what should be, uh, brought in.
That's not currently, um, their, their their practice.
It could be, it could be something that is, that, um, is
modified in how they do things.
I think there's opportunity.
So just one final short closed question.
If a government were to make another cancer initiative,
uh, cancer funding initiative,
would the remaining cancer drugs from the options
for investment list reflect the bot best possible
buy New Zealand could make?
I can't answer the question 'cause
I actually don't know what's on the line.
Fair enough. Um, um, wanted to speak
to you about lung cancer.
Mm-hmm. And knowing how impacted Maori Pacific peoples are
spinal lung cancer, um, really to, uh,
also understand your role within the system in terms
of prevention, um,
and that early intervention, trying
to take a population public health approach, um,
as an agency and an entity to really, uh, promote advice
and, um, give advice around how we could look to prevent,
um, or provide regulation to safeguard early uptake.
Um, but also, um, around the way with which, um,
cessation services are delivered.
You know, this is all pre-cancer.
Um, have, have you, uh, produced any reports
or advice on tobacco that point
to some levers that the government
and health nz TE could be using, um, recently
or in the past, um, that could shed a bit of light in terms
of your role in trying to provide a, a strong advice
for the direction of travel to reduce, you know, smoking
tobacco related harm.
Maybe I, I'll start
and then I might, I might turn it over to Sasha, uh,
for some additional insights.
Um, yes.
So in terms of prevention, we did produce, um,
a landmark report on prevention for cancer a few years ago.
And, um, identified all of the risk factors,
identified the prevalence of those factors being much
higher, uh, uh, for the most part with Maori
and, and Pacific peoples.
Um, and, um,
and then identified opportunities where, where more active,
uh, supports are made to reduce the exposure of, of people
to those cancer risk factors.
I think from a tobacco, uh, use perspective, New Zealand
has made a lot of progress, um, uh, in the last 20 years,
uh, in terms of significant drop in our, our smoking rates,
but there's still a big gap between, uh, Maori rates.
So the body smoking rates are still above 10% compared
to a 6%, uh, for, um,
and we still have much higher, uh, burden of cancer
for lung cancer, uh, much higher incidents and,
and mortality rates.
Um, but maybe I'll turn it over to Sasha
for additional comment on that.
Um, yes. I guess going into the next layer of detail, um,
we've been working really closely with, um,
health New Zealand on the lung cancer
screening pilot that took place.
There was a number of advisory groups, um,
looking at particular different parts of that pilot,
and we had people sitting on almost all of those.
Um, we've helped support and inform the indicative.
Um, and then the detailed business case, um, for, uh,
national lung screening program.
Um, more broadly, I'd say we are also doing
re uh, we're do, we are working closely
with the public health agency to look at, um,
population attributable factions.
So to what extent are particular risk factors, you know,
creating, um, impact within, uh,
the cancer outcomes for people.
Um, and that was one other thing I was going to mention. Oh.
Um, we've also might, it might sound like, um,
I'm varying off track, but, um, we've also done a lot
to support the holder Maori services team within
Health New Zealand and their investment into cancer
navigation services.
Now that is primarily to support people to be diagnosed
and then undertake treatment,
but particularly in the Kapa Maori settings,
what we are seeing is the wider au engaging with, um,
screening and early detection.
Is it because they're taking a whanau centered approach?
So we are working in a, a variety of different ways, some
of which aren't always obvious, I guess,
from a prevention early detection. Uh, just
To carry on with that Mr. Chair.
Um, so do you have any, um,
as the cancer control agency,
do you offer advice on prevention, um, to agencies in terms
of, um, uh, cancer prevention,
Uh, for tobacco related diseases?
You are for advice? Yeah.
Um, so that, that's primarily the responsibility
of the public health agency.
So, so we do the, the measurement and, and,
and look at tracking, um,
progress in reducing smoking rates,
getting into specific areas around policies
around nicotine replacement therapy and, and so on.
That's, that's not something that we get into
because the public health agency is, is equipped and,
and mandated with that level of detail.
Do you, but do you monitor them in terms of that function?
Um, as far as the ultimate outcome, which is
how smoking rates are tracking?
Um, yes.
Um, uh, we don't get into operational monitoring
where like there's specific policies and
That's just like the proliferation
of vape shops across, or do you guys have a
View on that? We report on
vaping rates for sure.
And, and you see there's this a definite crossover
where smoking rates, tobacco, smoking rates are going down
and, um, vaping rates have,
have gone up significantly in that.
So there's definitely something going on here, which we,
which we do report on. Oh, you
Of, you do watch that. Yeah. Yeah.
And it's in the state of cancer report as well.
Something really important just, uh,
when Sasha talked about navigation, we tend
to think about the importance
of smoking cessation before cancer.
Uh, but it is really important, uh, for patients
who are diagnosed with cancer, who are smokers
to stop smoking before treatment
because smoking, uh, interrupts and,
and affects the outcomes of treatment.
So that's another area where the navigation's important
to help ensure that patients understand that
and are supported, uh, in, in cessation
before treatment starts. Just
One thing I was just gonna ask on medications
or, um, treatments, uh, like NRT, um,
do you have like, um, monitoring function around the use
of NRT as one of the tools smoking cessation stuff?
We don't, we don't look at at that level of detail.
Obviously it's, it's, it's a critical tool, um,
for smoking cessation,
but we don't necessarily look at the nuances of that, of
that, um, introduction. Mm-hmm.
Okay. Alright. Uh, Ashley's got a couple more questions. I
Understand. Yeah. Thank
you. Um,
and I've been grateful for your fulsome answers,
but, um, wonder, I'm, I'm happy with short answers, uh,
for these ones if it's possible.
Um, what are the benefits of bowel screening between the age
of 45 and 50?
If,
Um, most of the clinical trials
that supported bowel cancer screening, as you know, Dr.
Rell were done in the,
in the late nineties and early two thousands.
Um, and that was, um,
before the, you know,
this current trend in early onset of bowel cancer.
So the evidence supporting, uh,
bowel cancer screening programs really was
based on that cohort.
And that's why most countries, um, set their starting age
of 15, uh, 15 and above.
I don't think we have enough clinical trial evidence for 45
to 50, um, yet.
Um, we do know that more
and more young people are getting bowel cancer, so
that's shifting and the ground is shifting and,
and so I think I, I, I don't think we,
we have definitive information on
that we do on 15 and above.
Thank you. Um, can you comment on the role of alcohol
as a cause of cancer in New Zealand?
Absolutely. Alcohol is in New Zealand, uh, is the fourth,
uh, uh, highest cause of cancer.
Um, and, um, you know,
after, uh, tobacco, um, obesity, physical inactivity
and, uh, and UV exposure, it's usually, it's,
it's number three in other high income countries.
Um, and so it has a, a very important role in, in, uh,
increasing the risk of cancer.
Uh, and it's something a lot of people aren't aware of,
and we need to do more to increase awareness
and, um, reduce, um, harmful alcohol use.
Thank you. If I go back to your, um, earlier point, uh,
route to diagnosis report
and the point that primary care, um, was a place
where there's the most potential to improve cancer survival
in New Zealand, what are the types of changes in primary
care that would be required in order
to achieve those benefits?
Yeah, I, I think we need better, better pathways, um, uh,
diagnostic pathways in primary care that help, uh, GP
identify those non-specific symptoms, um, early on.
And then have a clear guidelines on which,
what investigations to move forward on given,
given those symptoms, what are the appropriate types
of tests that need to be done, um,
and the timeliness of that.
So that's really important in terms of information
to help support, uh, gps,
but they also need to have access to those diagnostics.
Yeah. Can I just, and the, um,
Can I just stop on the, What,
What jurisdiction would you say did have good pathways
for primary care, um, that New Zealand could learn from
Denmark? Um,
so Denmark is a leader in, um,
implementing these accelerated diagnostic pathways.
Um, it's called the three-legged data stool.
That's what we call it in the system where they've,
they've created some really strong tools, um, and,
and processes to funnel different levels of,
of, of symptoms.
So alarm symptoms go directly to, um, specialist, uh,
consultation symptoms that are kind of vague,
then have their own pathway, and they've created capacity.
So they go to specialized clinics where all
of the tests are available, CT MR lab tests in a one-stop
shop, uh,
and they get referred very quickly to that process.
And clinicians have access to these sort
of pathways decision trees that say, okay,
for this symptom, this is what you do.
This is where you refer the patient,
their information systems support,
that kind of exchange of information.
So Denmark is, is internationally recognized
for having done this very, very well.
Um, they're about the same size population,
but obviously very different geography than us,
much more concentrated.
I'm aware that, um, separate issue, but also primary care.
You or you commented about moving more services
into the community.
Mm-hmm. I know there are some infu infusion
centers starting up.
What's the next big opportunity to move care out
of the hospital and into the community for cancer?
Um, so besides infusions, mm. I think, I think, uh,
Or you could tell me that we've only on the tip
of the iceberg with infusions and it's still infusions,
Infusions is important. I think the other one
is skin cancer, uh, uh, detection
and, um, and,
and excision of, of lesions, uh, for skin cancer.
I think there's a, a big opportunity,
it's already happening in a number of clinics with gps
with special interest who have training,
not just the minor minor,
but the more sort of, um, the, the larger excisions
that now are done in hospitals.
Uh, they can be done safely.
There's a Wakefield clinic
and outside of Nelson as an example,
where they do that really effectively.
I think we can be more in that space cancer perspective.
Thank you. And, um, does New Zealand need a Center
for Cancer excellence?
Um, so this, this is the idea of a comprehensive,
like a Peter Mac type of thing, comprehensive.
I may have visited the Peter Mac recently.
Um, yeah, it's, it's, it's an interesting question.
I I, you know, usually these centers are indicated
for population sizes of five to 10 million,
so one per five to 10 million.
Um, you know, uh, I think there are
other ways that we can invest, uh, better ways
that we can invest, uh, a billion dollars and, and,
and get benefit, uh, for cancer patients
beyond building a very expensive facility.
Thank you. And just barriers for cancer patients, um,
accessing care, what, what stands out to you?
Um, there, you know, we,
we talk all the time about unfunded medicines,
but you mentioned travel assistance.
Yeah. Got a very sort of dispersed health system across,
along thin country, seem
to be endless return visits in cancer care.
What, what are the, what's,
what's the lay of the land there?
Primary care we talked about, I, that's, that's a huge,
uh, barrier enabler.
I, you know, I, I've visited cancer centers across the
country and I always, uh, go into the chemotherapy clinics
and talk to patients and ask them
what their biggest concern is.
And across the board, um, access
to transportation assistance always comes up, um,
as a huge issue.
We have to fix that. Um, if we're going to try
and kind of match, um, capacity to demand and, and,
and help patients go to where the wait lists are shortest,
uh, and where there's capacity, we need
to fix the transportation assistance programs. So
That does fix mean the entitlement
or the fact that you're asking people when they're very
distressed to try
and get a bundle of receipts together
for a trip they might be taking three times a week.
That seems to be a big part of the problem, as well
as the actual funding behind it.
And, and The, the, the fact that they have to pay
and then get reimbursed and a lot of times that
That Money's not there, can't afford that.
Um, considering the, um, burden that Maori suffer to cancer,
uh, you have, um, as, um, you know,
our Maori leadership in that space,
what's the relationship like in terms of what you do,
how you work together, uh,
but also, you know, the, the different parts of the advocacy
that's required across the space.
Take that on. Yeah.
Um, have played quite a fundamental role in,
uh, supporting the creation
of the agency under standing up of it.
Um, and they continue to be a strong partner,
um, that we work closely
with across a range of different things.
Um, there are large areas
of overlap between our priorities and their priorities,
although I accept that they come
from slightly different perspectives.
Um, uh,
and so for the majority of things
we work closely also, they're a very small organization.
Uh, they're a community, uh, based organization.
So, um, what we, generally speaking, what we try
to do is identify the priorities, um, that we share.
And then within those, what are the areas
that they have the capacity
and the ability to, to support us with.
Um, most of the time it is, I would say,
an exceptional relationship.
And I was just gonna ask about, um, because they are small
and low on capacity, um, is there a way with which, um,
you can support them as well in terms of, you know,
whether it's the data, sourcing data
or you know, the different parts of your organization
that can do that information sharing?
Yeah, we've, we support 'em
in a variety of different ways.
Um, so for example, one of my teams currently seconded to,
um, them in a leadership role.
Uh, and we are supporting them
because they're about to host the World Indigenous Cancer
Conference next year.
Um, so sometimes it's about people time. Yeah.
Uh, sometimes it's about, uh, providing data.
Sometimes they are supporting us.
So the work that they are doing to provide coordination
and support for all
of the community based Kapa Maori navigation services is
informing the work that we are doing
to create a national navigation model of care
that works across all settings.
Um, so yeah, it cer certainly it's a very beneficial
Thank you.
Alright. I think Ben, thank you
for answering all of those questions.
I don't see any more question members, so, um,
do appreciate you making yourself available this morning
for just over an hour and a half.
Um, there may be some written questions
where members choose to follow up.
I believe we have until, is it three working days
after today until to do that.
So that would be, uh, COB Monday for members.
Thank you to all of you. Appreciate you coming in.
Thank you very much. Thank you very much.
Five minutes. Let's wait for us
to go Private.
May be enough time. Shoot.